'\" t
.\" Manual page for fantaip
.\" Copyright (C) 2004-2006 Jack Louis <jack@rapturesecurity.org>
.\" Maintained by Robert E. Lee <robert@unicornscan.org> (2025-present)
.de Vb
.ft CW
.nf
..
.de Ve
.ft R

.fi
..
.TH "FANTAIP" "1" "2026-01-05" "unicornscan 0.4.38" "Network Tools"
.SH NAME

.PP
fantaip \- ARP proxy for phantom (spoofed) IP addresses

.SH SYNOPSIS

.PP
.B fantaip
[\fB\-d\fP]
[\fB\-H\fP \fIMAC\fP]
[\fB\-h\fP]
\fB\-i\fP \fIinterface\fP
[\fB\-v\fP]
[\fB\-g\fP \fIseconds\fP]
\fIIP\fP[\fB/\fP\fICIDR\fP]

.SH DESCRIPTION

.PP
\fBfantaip\fP (Phantom IP) is an ARP proxy that responds to ARP requests for
IP addresses that do not exist on the network. This enables source IP spoofing
in \fBunicornscan\fP by ensuring that responses to spoofed packets are routed
back to your listening interface.

.PP
When scanning with a spoofed source IP address, target hosts send their responses
to that spoofed address. Without \fBfantaip\fP, the network cannot resolve the
spoofed IP via ARP, and responses are dropped. \fBfantaip\fP intercepts ARP
requests for the phantom IP(s) and responds with your NIC's MAC address,
causing response traffic to be delivered to your interface.

.PP
\fBfantaip\fP also sends periodic gratuitous ARP announcements to maintain the
ARP cache entries on the local network segment.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
\fB\-d\fP
Daemonize. Detach from the terminal and run in the background.
.TP
\fB\-H\fP \fIMAC\fP
Hardware (MAC) address to use in ARP replies. Format: \fBXX:XX:XX:XX:XX:XX\fP.
If not specified, the interface's actual MAC address is used.
.TP
\fB\-h\fP
Display help message and exit.
.TP
\fB\-i\fP \fIinterface\fP
Network interface to use (e.g., \fBeth0\fP, \fBwlan0\fP). This option is required.
.TP
\fB\-v\fP
Verbose operation. Can be specified multiple times to increase verbosity.
.TP
\fB\-g\fP \fIseconds\fP
Interval in seconds between gratuitous ARP broadcasts. Default is 30 seconds.
Set to 0 to disable periodic gratuitous ARP.

.SH ARGUMENTS

.TP
\fIIP\fP[\fB/\fP\fICIDR\fP]
The phantom IP address or CIDR range to proxy. Examples:
.RS
.IP \(bu 2
\fB192.168.1.100\fP \- Single IP address
.IP \(bu 2
\fB192.168.1.0/24\fP \- Entire /24 subnet (256 addresses)
.IP \(bu 2
\fB10.0.0.0/8\fP \- Large CIDR block
.RE

.SH EXAMPLES

.PP
Proxy a single phantom IP on eth0:
.Vb
fantaip -i eth0 192.168.1.100
.Ve

.PP
Proxy an entire /24 subnet on wlan0:
.Vb
fantaip -i wlan0 192.168.1.0/24
.Ve

.PP
Proxy with custom gratuitous ARP interval (60 seconds):
.Vb
fantaip -i eth0 -g 60 10.0.0.0/24
.Ve

.PP
Disable periodic gratuitous ARP:
.Vb
fantaip -i wlan0 -g 0 192.168.1.50
.Ve

.PP
Run in background (daemon mode):
.Vb
fantaip -d -i eth0 192.168.1.0/24
.Ve

.PP
Use with unicornscan for spoofed source scanning:
.Vb
# Terminal 1: Start fantaip for the spoofed source
fantaip -i eth0 192.168.1.250

# Terminal 2: Scan with spoofed source address
unicornscan -s 192.168.1.250 -i eth0 192.168.1.1:1-1024
.Ve

.SH STATISTICS

.PP
When interrupted (SIGINT/Ctrl+C), \fBfantaip\fP displays statistics:
.IP \(bu 2
ARP requests received
.IP \(bu 2
ARP replies sent
.IP \(bu 2
Gratuitous ARPs sent

.SH SIGNALS

.TP
\fBSIGINT\fP, \fBSIGTERM\fP
Clean shutdown. Print statistics and exit.

.SH SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS

.PP
\fBfantaip\fP is a network security tool intended for authorized penetration testing,
security research, and network troubleshooting. Unauthorized use to intercept or
redirect network traffic may violate laws and regulations.

.PP
Running \fBfantaip\fP requires root privileges or CAP_NET_RAW capability.

.SH SEE ALSO

.PP
\fBunicornscan\fP(1), \fBarp\fP(8), \fBtcpdump\fP(1)

.SH AUTHOR

.PP
Original author: Jack Louis (gh0st) <jack@rapturesecurity.org>
.br
Modernized (2025): Robert E. Lee <robert@unicornscan.org>

.SH COPYRIGHT

.PP
Copyright \(co 2004-2006 Jack Louis. Licensed under the GNU General Public License v2.
